From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Baro. This is the Daily.
[music]
Today, what we're learning about the
FBI's highly unusual seizure of [music]
voting records last week in Georgia, the
presence of the nation's top
intelligence official at the scene, and
the [music] stunning phone call that
reveals how personally involved
President Trump has become in the
[music] investigation.
I spoke with [music] my colleague,
Develin Barrett.
>> [music]
>> It's Tuesday, February 3rd.
Devlin, this story begins with a
dramatic scene which unfolded a few days
ago in Fulton County, Georgia. Can you
just describe that to us?
>> Sure. So, take a live look at the Fulton
County Elections Office near Atlanta.
Last Wednesday morning, a group of FBI
agents show up for a massive
undertaking, the collection of a huge
volume of stuff related to the 2020
election in Fulton County.
>> FBI agents spent the afternoon inside
the records warehouse for the Fulton
County, Georgia Board of Elections.
Fulton County contains the city of
Atlanta. So obviously it has a lot of
election records, but specifically what
the agents were there to get were the
paper ballots from that election, but
also other things such as voter roles,
such as tabulation tapes, all of which
is essentially data and documentation
about the 2020 election. So, just to be
clear, every single ballot or close to
it from an election 6 years ago is taken
by the FBI out of this building,
>> right? And it takes hours to load all
those hundreds of boxes into trucks and
bring them to an FBI storage facility.
[music]
And what exactly is the rationale for
this search? I think by now most people
understand President Trump has a
fixation on Fulton County and its
recurring place in his baseless claims
of election fraud in 2020 when he lost
re-election. But those claims of fraud,
we've covered them many times
[clears throat] on this show in Fulton
County. They have been so thoroughly
litigated and relitigated that it would
be hard to understand why a new
investigation into them would ever be
undertaken.
>> Right? This stuff has been investigated
before. These ballots have been counted
multiple times to make sure they got the
count right. And it's always checked
out. And so when you see an
investigation like this, when you see an
FBI search warrant like this, it raises
the obvious question, well, why now?
What has changed? What new or different
information do we have to justify this
search? And the reality is the affidavit
that is the underlying rationale for the
search warrant, we can't see. that's
still sealed.
>> So, we don't know exactly what
evidentiary argument was made to justify
this, but we know what the theoretical
argument is, right?
>> It's just not possible to have lost
Georgia. It's not possible.
>> Trump's been making it more or less for
6 years.
>> In Georgia, the Secretary of State began
illegally processing ballots weeks
before election day.
>> That somehow someway,
>> thousands and thousands of counterfeit
ballots for Joe Biden. these ballots,
this evidence shows election fraud.
>> Now, very recently, you've seen the
president come back to this subject.
>> It's great to be back in beautiful
Davos, Switzerland.
>> For example, when the president speaks
at Davos, Switzerland last month,
>> it was a rigged election. Everybody now
knows that they found out.
>> He talks about the 2020 election.
>> People will soon be prosecuted for what
they did.
It's probably breaking news, but it
should be.
>> And he predicts that there will be
prosecutions of people.
>> But Devin, how does the president start
to make the threats that he issued in a
place like Davos turn into reality? And
how does he get to this FBI search of
this voting facility in Fulton County
given the highly public lack of evidence
that any fraud ever occurred? So the
administration assigns this case to a
federal prosecutor in Missouri.
>> Missouri, not Georgia. That seems
notable,
>> right? This investigative effort, this
search in Georgia is not being overseen
by a prosecutor in Atlanta, which I
think is noteworthy because the federal
prosecutor's office in Atlanta had
already looked at this years earlier and
decided there was nothing to pursue.
Mhm.
>> And in addition to the federal
prosecutor in Missouri, the other key
person driving this forward is Tulsi
Gabbard, the director of national
intelligence. She runs an agency that
frankly is supposed to be looking at
foreign security threats, cyber threats.
And very oddly, she goes to the scene of
this search. She goes to the election
hub building in Fulton County and is on
scene as part of the search group. And
that is not the normal way of running an
FBI search. That is certainly not
something that I've seen before with any
DNI or for that matter with any senior
FBI official. You know, if you want to
cast back to something like the FBI
search at Mara Lago, it's not like there
were senior FBI officials running that
search. That was done by bureau
personnel. There were managers there
certainly, but they weren't having the
heads of agencies run it.
>> So, from what you're saying, the way the
president gets this FBI search is he
kind of cobbles together a group of
willing participants who will do this
for him. one of whom is the director of
national intelligence.
And as you're saying, that seems highly
unusual that she would end up at the
scene of this FBI search. What could
explain that?
>> What our reporting has found is that the
president ordered her to go. The
president told her to go and she is
there on his direction and she is acting
on his behalf. And I think it speaks to
the degree to which the president is
personally interested in this
investigation. The president is
personally pushing forward this
investigation.
And it speaks to, I think, the people
within his administration that are
willing to do this kind of thing for
him.
>> Right. Well, let's keep talking about
Gabbard for just a moment and why she
would be willing to do this. As you're
saying, [clears throat] this doesn't
exactly seem like the most natural use
of her time, but Gabbard famously seems
to want to please the president. And we
know that because many months ago, she
publicly claimed without evidence that
former President Barack Obama had
potentially criminally violated the law
because his administration began the
Trump Russia investigation. She
suggested that perhaps Obama should be
charged with a crime.
>> Right. And I think you've seen
throughout the administration instances
where she has played up many of the
unfounded accusations, many of the
suspicions that President Trump promotes
himself. And so I think she has been a
very eager participant in Trump's push
to find purported evidence of voter
fraud in 2020 and Trump's push to try to
build a criminal case against people he
doesn't like over the fact that he lost
the election in 2020.
>> Got it. So that's how we get the
director of national intelligence
basically going to this FBI raid as the
president's eyes and ears.
>> Right. Exactly.
>> And what does Gabbard actually do at the
scene when FBI agents are grabbing all
of these ballots and voting
technologies?
>> Right. So, there's not really much for a
director of national intelligence to do
at a search, but what she is seen doing
when she's there is talking to someone
on the phone. She's walking around.
She's visible. She's present.
>> Kind of lurking.
>> Yeah. And so, that's significant and
unusual. But what's far more unusual is
what happens after the search
when she has a meeting with some of the
FBI agents who conducted the search.
[music] And that meeting really reveals
a lot about the president's interest in
all this and also [music]
may end up undercutting everything the
president is trying to achieve.
[music]
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> So Delvin, tell us about this meeting
that Tulsi Gabbard, the director of
national intelligence, has after the FBI
search.
>> Right. So after the search, Tulsi
Gabbard goes to the FBI field office to
talk to some of the agents who worked
the search. And it's not completely
unheard of for a senior official to
visit the FBI field office. The agents
sometimes get VIP visits, but what
happens in the meeting quickly becomes
quite strange and quite concerning to
some people.
What happens is while she's talking to
the agents, she decides to call
President Trump.
>> And the first time she calls, she
doesn't get through, but very quickly
after that, Trump calls her back. And
Tulsi Gabbard puts President Trump on
speaker phone to talk to the other
agents.
>> Huh.
>> And what's described to us is that at
first the president is essentially just
thanking them and praising them for
their work. But then he starts to ask
some questions and [music] at that point
the supervisor in the room tries to
essentially run point on answering those
questions because now you're getting
into a very dicey area where the
president [music] himself is asking
questions of the field agents, the
people on the ground doing the work and
you know the whole thing is incredibly
legally fraught and complicated.
Well, just explain why it's legally
fraud. I can imagine practically why
it's fraud because suddenly you have a
bunch of FBI agents talking with the
president of the United States about a
live investigation. But but legally,
what's the issue?
>> Right? I mean, on a basic level, it's a
bad look, right? You have the person who
has demanded this investigation, the
politically powerful person who's
demanded this investigation now talking
to the people who are supposedly doing
an independent and very fact-based
investigation. But it's legally
problematic for a different but related
reason. And that is one of the things
we've seen already in this
administration is prosecutions that
Trump wanted to see happen have fallen
apart in part because he has so publicly
and aggressively demanded certain people
be prosecuted. You see that in the cases
against the former FBI director James
Comey. You see that in the case against
the New York Attorney General Leticia
James. There you saw arguments being
made about vindictive prosecution. And
what the administration has argued to
sort of counter claims of vindictive
prosecution is well it doesn't matter
what the president says because it's the
investigators and the prosecutors who
are pursuing the case.
>> Right?
>> Well, if you have the president talking
directly to the investigators, it
suddenly becomes much harder to argue
that there isn't a connection between
what the president wants and what the
investigators are doing. So you're sort
of creating connective tissue for anyone
who's ever charged in this, if anyone
ever is, to argue, look, this is unjust.
This is unfair. This case should be
thrown out because the president is
talking to the investigators in real
time while they're still investigating.
>> Right. You're saying at some point when
in theory somebody who ran the Fulton
County election counting in 2020 is
charged with a crime based on this
search, you can imagine at trial perhaps
FBI agents being called to the stand to
testify about Trump discussing the
investigation with them and it very much
making clear how much Trump wanted these
people to be charged, how personally he
invested he was in all this and that
that would help make the case for
vindictive prosecution and perhaps
ultimately get whatever charges were
brought tossed.
>> Right? So, there's a lot of reasons why
legally, forget just politically or
common sense wise, legally this is not
great if you ever want to try to build a
criminal case out of this. So, what
we're seeing here is that this
relentlessly hands-on approach from
President Trump to this particular
investigation, the 2020 election, Fulton
County, it's getting Trump what he wants
on the front end. I mean, those ballots
were seized, but it's starting to
undermine his ability to get what he
wants on the back end, which is election
officials in prison,
>> right? And to be fair, this is in
keeping with how he views himself in
this second term. He has said
repeatedly, I am the chief law
enforcement official in the United
States. I run the FBI and I run the
Justice Department,
>> not the attorney general, not the FBI,
me, the president. So what you see is
him acting on that belief.
>> But I think that's a big difference from
the courts accepting that this is
appropriate behavior or this is the kind
of behavior that will survive challenges
in court. M Delvin, how are the election
officials in Fulton County who have just
been subjected to this raid, to this
search? How are they responding to what
has happened? So,
>> we will not give one inch to those who
seek to take control of elections in
Fulton County.
>> They have already vowed to take the
government to court to fight this, to
essentially demand the evidence back
>> with them. Are they opening the boxes?
Are they stuffing other ballots in
there? I have no clue.
>> They say they're not comfortable with
the Trump administration having control
of these ballots.
>> He does not want the midterm elections
to take away his power. So, he's trying
to create chaos. So, this is what he
>> Few local election officials have gone
further saying that the FBI [music]
search should scare everyone because
this to them is really about the next
election in 2026, the midterms. protect
your vote at all costs. I'm telling you,
everybody always says your life depends
on it. Oh, your life does depend [music]
on it this time.
>> And what do they mean there?
>> Look, I think the concern for a lot of
election experts and a lot of Democrats
is that the administration may at some
point in the future try to use these
claims of fraud to buttress their
argument that some votes should not be
counted or some results are not the
right results. And those concerns are
based on more than just this search in
Fulton County.
>> Over the last year, Trump's Justice
Department has filed lawsuits seeking
voter role data, personal information
about voters in almost half the states
in the country. And that is something
that hasn't been done before. That is
very different and out of keeping with
how voting has been managed up till now.
And I think a lot of the states who are
fighting the Trump administration over
these types of things see a larger
pattern of trying to seow doubt about
the integrity of elections, trying to
prepare the groundwork for maybe
challenging results in 2026 if it
doesn't go Trump's way. Mhm.
>> That's an election in which, you know,
there's certainly a possibility that the
House of Representatives could become
democratically controlled and that would
significantly curtail Trump's power as
president over the following two years.
>> Right? And as we know, doubts about
election are just at this point central
to the Trump movement. And those doubts
require stoking. And this FBI search of
this Fulton County election hub is an
act of stoking. It puts the issue of
election doubt, election denialism back
on the radar for Americans at a time
when most people aren't really thinking
about it.
>> Think for a minute about what an FBI
investigation is. By its very nature, an
FBI investigation sews doubt and sews
suspicion about the people being
investigated.
The president has been sewing doubt and
suspicion about elections for years when
he was out of power, right?
>> And now what you're seeing is that now
that he's in power, he can use the
levers of government. He can use the
mechanics of something like the FBI to
sew that [music] doubt and sew that
suspicion. And that doubt and suspicion
becomes the official posture of the
government.
>> Well, Develin, thank you very much.
Thank you. [music]
>> In a radio interview on Monday
afternoon, President Trump escalated his
claims of election fraud, declaring that
Republicans should take control of
elections across the country.
>> The Republicans should say, "We want to
take over. We should take over the
voting the voting in at least many 15
places." The Republicans ought to
nationalize the voting and we have
>> that prompted a swift rebuke from the
Democratic leader in the Senate, Chuck
Schumer.
>> You think he believes in democracy?
Does Donald Trump need a copy of the
Constitution?
What he's saying is outlandishly
illegal. Once again, the [music]
president's talking no different.
We'll be right back. Here's
[music]
what else you need another day.
On Monday, the Secretary of Homeland
Security, Christy Gnome, announced that
body cameras would immediately be given
to federal officers working [music] in
Minneapolis.
It was the Trump administration's latest
effort to adjust its tactics amid a
national outcry over the killing of
[music] two American citizens. The first
Renee Good by an ICE agent. The second,
Alex [music] Prey, by two border patrol
agents. Gnome said that the body cameras
would eventually be given to all
Homeland Security agents across the
country.
And a proposed deal to end a partial
government shutdown reached last week
[music] by President Trump and Senate
Democrats has stumbled in the House
where some Republicans are threatening
[music] to block its passage. Several
hardline conservatives [music] have
demanded policy changes to the funding
package, including a requirement that
people show identification before
voting. Democrats [music] who oppose
such requirements say that change would
kill the funding package, which could
[music] further extend the shutdown by
days, if not weeks.
Today's [music] episode was produced by
Asta Chhattervedi, Claire Tennisceter,
and [music] Mary Wilson. It was edited
by Rob Zipco with help from Michael
Benois. Contains [music] music by Alicia
Eup and Rowanto
and was engineered by [music] Chris
Wood.
[music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Makabar.
See you tomorrow.